--- PAGE 1 ---
A Sun Skins
Adap tive Faç ade S ys tems f or Building Integr ated Or ganic Photovolt aic s (OBIP V )
Climate change increases the demand for Therefore, this research explores the potential of
renewable energy sources, like photovolt aics. thin, folded polycarbonate sheets for the
However, the search for appropriate areas integration of organic photovolt aics (OPV ).
of ten results in a competition for inst allation The resulting Sun Skins façade systems combine
space (e.g. food productions vs. energy industrial thermoforming processes with
har vesting). At the same time, all the building glass laminating techniques to create light weight
envelopes in our cities of fer an ex tensive three-dimensional solar façade panels with
area reser ve for sust ainable energy production. increased material stif fness and minimal weight.
To unlock these sur faces, requires bet ter B Sun Skins en Dét ail
building integrated photovolt aic systems. Ideally,
these should be multifunctional, light weight, Using a comput ational work flow, integrates struc-
designable, and adapt able to dif ferent inst allation tural and solar analysis directly into the
requirements. geometr y generation of the Sun Skins panels.
By developing a tool set based on the
easily accessible Rhino© / Grasshopper ©
plat form, helps architects to break down planning
complexit y and to optimize and design a variet y
of dif ferent Sun Skins solutions.
C Sun Skins Comput ational Approach
Fig. 1 - Sun Skins Prototype with Cable Net Integration

--- PAGE 2 ---
B Sun Sk ins en Dé ta il
Integr ating Or ganic P V into Tr anspar ent and Folded Light weight Component s
The appropriate manufacturing of three-dimensional Adapting traditional processes of industrial
components necessit ates suit able fabrication thermoforming proofed successful for
processes and materials. In accordance with the transforming flat polycarbonate sheet geometries
lightness of the organic PV (OPV ) technology, into three-dimensional shapes with shell-like
the project Sun Skins explores thin plastic sheet load-bearing capacities. Fur ther tests on a det ail
materials for their potential use in photovolt aic geometr y level with locally introduced ribs
façade components. and beads resulted in additional stif fness and an
fur ther increase in material ef ficiency.
Flat panel strength geometric variability improved stiffness
through geometry throUgh ribbing
mATERIAL INTENSIVE op timization light weight
Fig. 2 - Formactive Geometr y Development
The thermoforming process is both precise and in a sandwich component. The durable bonding
flexible enough to produce light weight of the dif ferent layer s is achieved appropriating
components for the integration of OPV modules techniques from glass lamination using hot melts.
structural base l ayer
(polycarbonat
2 mm - 6 mm)
1st bonding L ayer
(tpu 0,38 mm)
organic pv modules
(0,3 mm)
2nd bonding L ayer
(tpu 0,38 mm)
protective back cover
l ayer
(polycarbonat
2 mm - 6 mm)
Fig. 3 - Layers of a Sun Skin Component
Nex t, the key learnings from the fabrication and
material tests are formalized within a
parametric geometr y generation. This allows for
a quick generation and evaluation of
various design options.

--- PAGE 3 ---
C Sun Sk ins Comp u tat ion a l A p p roach
Formalizing ‘Key L earnings´ into an E asy to Use Tool Se t
To allow for an easy to use and fast design of parameter s, such as the height and rot ation of the
various Sun Skin geometries, we developed component sur faces, as well as the angles of
a parametric tool set, based on our material tests. at t ack of the side sur face.
The user can quickly adapt relevant geometric
Diverse Set Of Parameter Families
Range Of Parameters In Family Panel Choice
Fig. 4 - Geometric Variation within a Single Component Type
Preset protot ype geometries that are already designs within the Rhino© and Grasshopper©
optimized, tested and validated are included plat forms, using a pre-programmed simulation
in the tool to facilit ate ver y fast designs solutions. and optimization system.
Future user s are also able to explore their own
Displacement (cm)
0.00 0.372 0.867 1.24 0 10 50 cm
Fig. 5 - Automated Parametric Geometr y Generation
Accordingly, the research team utilized a algorithms. The comput ational models and struc-
combination of comput ational methods, including tural assumptions of the tool set were
2D FEM (finite element) and det ailed calibrated with the help of a series of 1:1 bending-
3D FEM analysis, solar analysis as well as genetic tension-compression tests.
Frankfurt Frankfurt Frankfurt Frankfurt
1/1 - 31/12 1/1 - 31/12 1/1 - 31/12 1/1 - 31/12
kWh/m2 kWh/m2 kWh/m2 kWh/m2
823.06 853.53 853.53 823.06
845.91 845.92 815.80
838.30 838.30 808.53
830.68 830.68 801.27
823.06 823.06 794.01
Fig. 6 - Structural- and Solar Simulations
The results of the simulations demonstrate a For fur ther insides, this Sun Skins façade
substantial improvement of the structural mock-up hopes to inspire visitor s to imagine their
performance and material efficiency in comparison to own design approach and per sonal solar
flat façade building integrated photovoltaic panels. aesthetic.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Fig. 7 - Potential Façade Cladding with Sun Skins Components

--- PAGE 5 ---
D Rese a rch T e a m
Univer sit y Par tner Frank fur t Univer sit y of Applied Sciences
Technische Hochschule Ost west falen-Lippe
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Timo Carl
Prof. Dr.-Phil. Markus Schein
Dipl.-Ing. Roger Loho
Dipl.-Des. Max S tein
M.A. Pascal Nünninghof f
B.A. S amuel Gemeinder
B.A. cand. Svenja Bet termann
Industr y Par tner s
®
ASCA GmbH
®
Isik Plastik S an. ve Dis Tic. Paz. A.S.
Logo: Lisa Heinze